Custom ClusterRole for RootSync reconcilers (#938)
GoogleContainerTools/kpt-config-sync: docs/design-docs/02-custom-root-reconciler-clusterrole.md

team or third party can accomplish in the cluster, one can imagine limiting what
permissions are granted to the `ServiceAccount` running the reconciler.

However, as Config Sync is currently granting `cluster-admin`, any custom role bindings
are effectively ignored; the reconciler will, due to the binding added by Config Sync,
have access to do _anything_ regardless.

To follow the [principle of least privilege], one should ensure the reconciler only has
access to deploy the expected resources.

See also [#935].

[principle of least privilege]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Principle_of_least_privilege
[#935]: https://github.com/GoogleContainerTools/kpt-config-sync/issues/935

## Design Overview

By providing the name of a user-defined `ClusterRole` for a `RootSync`, a user can
override which role Config Sync binds to. This configuration is exposed as a new field
on `spec.overrides` for a `RootSync`:

```yaml
spec:
  overrides:
    clusterRole: my-custom-role
```

This role is defaulted to `cluster-admin` in order to stay backwards compatible.

For the case where a single `ClusterRole` is not expressive enough to configure the

> permissions a user want, we also allow the special sentinel value `%none%`, which

Author: I don't know; I don't think so. I picked it for two reasons:
1. It is a value that can never be a valid name of a `ClusterRole` (because `%` is a disallowed character), so setting it to this can never end up binding to an unintended role created later.
2. I found it more descriptive than e.g. using a single invalid character or something else along those lines.
If you don't like it we can remove that part of this PR; although I do find it appealing to have _some_ way to completely turn off the binding...

> permissions a user want, we also allow the special sentinel value `%none%`, which

Author: Another option would be to make the property pointer-valued, and differentiate between "not set" and "set to an empty string", but that seems bad for other reasons...

> permissions a user want, we also allow the special sentinel value `%none%`, which

Reviewer: Another option could be to make this a struct with a nested `name` and `enabled` field. This could create a clearer API for how to disable ClusterRoleBinding, although adds more API permutations (e.g. `name=my-cluster-role, enabled=false` probably doesn't make sense).

I don't feel too strongly about it and am okay with `%none%`, my main concern is whether this is unconventional

> permissions a user want, we also allow the special sentinel value `%none%`, which

Author: I had the struct idea independently (sleeping on ideas is often effective! 😄), but I imagined it as
```
type ClusterRoleBindingOverrides struct {
  RoleName string
  Disabled   bool
}
```
This way the zero value of the struct is the current behavior (if an empty `RoleName` defaults it to `"cluster-admin"`); setting the name to something else does what this PR currently does for any value other than `%none%`, and setting `Disabled: true` disables the binding (and ignores `RoleName`, i.e. `Disabled` takes precedence).

I'll work on an update here address this (and other comments).

`ClusterRole` you wish this `RootSync` to be reconciled under; you must create this role
yourself, but Config Sync will create the `ClusterRoleBinding` for you.

```yaml
apiVersion: configsync.gke.io/v1beta1
kind: RootSync
metadata:
  name: root-sync
  namespace: config-management-system
spec:
  overrides:
    clusterRole: my-cluster-role
  # ...
---
apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
kind: ClusterRole
metadata:
  name: my-cluster-role
rules:
# ...
```

You can also use the special value `%none%` and disable automatic binding to any role.
The reconciler will then run with effectively no permissions, until you manually create
some role or cluster role bindings for it.

**Note** that while the name of the relevant service account will _often_ be predictable
as `root-reconciler-<root-reconciler-name>`, this is not guaranteed by Config Sync. You
can always find the service account by its labels; in particular, the labels
`configsync.gke.io/sync-kind` and `configsync.gke.io/sync-name` should be useful.

## Risks and Mitigations

This feature is entirely backwards-compatible, by means of being opt-in.

## Test Plan

> Implementation of this feature can includes automated tests that verify the behavior.

Author: There is pretty good coverage of the new and changed features here, although not among the e2e tests. In particular, see the changes to [rootsync_controller_test.go](https://github.com/GoogleContainerTools/kpt-config-sync/pull/938/files#diff-96d9758339603eab1bf5deb9d64abf4acb751b8474cd85e2cd4d790a76514291).

However, as Config Sync is currently granting `cluster-admin`, any custom role bindings
are effectively ignored; the reconciler will, due to the binding added by Config Sync,
have access to do _anything_ regardless.

To follow the [principle of least privilege], one should ensure the reconciler only has
access to deploy the expected resources.

See also [#935].

[principle of least privilege]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Principle_of_least_privilege
[#935]: https://github.com/GoogleContainerTools/kpt-config-sync/issues/935

## Design Overview

By providing the name of a user-defined `ClusterRole` for a `RootSync`, a user can
override which role Config Sync binds to. This configuration is exposed as a new field
on `spec.overrides` for a `RootSync`:

```yaml
spec:
  overrides:
    clusterRole:
      name: my-custom-role
```

This role is defaulted to `cluster-admin` in order to stay backwards compatible.

For the case where a single `ClusterRole` is not expressive enough to configure the
permissions a user want, you can instead set `disabled: true` on the override object:

```yaml
spec:
  overrides:
    clusterRole:

>       disabled: true

Reviewer 2: Whoever has access to RootSync has access to grant themselves any permission they want by specifying the right cluster role. This has the problem of privilege escalation. However, given that RootSync has cluster-admin access before this change, this change isn't that dangerous, but could be surprising to admins when they grant limited access but also grant RootSync access to someone else. @tomasaschan what do you think about this caveat? Ideally the toggle should live outside of RootSync, but it's less of a problem for RootSync compared to RepoSync API.

Author: In the setup we run which motivates this feature this won't be an issue - we do not intend to grant access to create new syncs or update existing ones. In fact, the whole point is to keep all syncs in a repo we control, so that we can review the setup and ensure permissions are what they should be, while allowing them to sync config from repos we don't. In other words, this feature is what allows us to _prevent_ privilege escalation.

So I don't think there's a privilege escalation vector here that wasn't here already. If you can create or edit syncs, you can sync in config from an arbitrary source, and grant yourself whatever permissions you want.

As for RepoSyncs, in addition to all of the above, they will not be able to create cluster scoped resources, so any escalation will be even less limited.

Reviewer 2: The privilege escalation problem is more on the RepoSync given that it has no permission to do anything by default. 

>  If you can create or edit syncs, you can sync in config from an arbitrary source, and grant yourself whatever permissions you want.

This isn't true for RepoSync. RepoSync editors don't have access to modify the RBAC rolebindings granted to the namespace reconciler SA.

```
This disables creating the `ClusterRoleBinding` entirely.

If both `disabled: true` and a custom name is specified, `disabled` "wins" and no binding
is created.

## User Guide

To take advantage of this new feature, set `spec.overrides.clusterRole` to the name of a
`ClusterRole` you wish this `RootSync` to be reconciled under; you must create this role
yourself, but Config Sync will create the `ClusterRoleBinding` for you.

```yaml
apiVersion: configsync.gke.io/v1beta1
kind: RootSync
metadata:
  name: root-sync
  namespace: config-management-system
spec:
  overrides:
    clusterRole:
      name: my-cluster-role
  # ...
---
apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
kind: ClusterRole
metadata:
  name: my-cluster-role
rules:
# ...
```

You can also disable automatic binding to any role.

```yaml
apiVersion: configsync.gke.io/v1beta1
kind: RootSync
metadata:
  name: root-sync
  namespace: config-management-system
spec:
  overrides:
    clusterRole:

>       name: my-cluster-role

Reviewer: Was the intent here to set `disabled: true`?

  # ...
```

The reconciler will then run with effectively no permissions, until you manually create
some role or cluster role bindings for it.

**Note** that while the name of the relevant service account will _often_ be predictable
as `root-reconciler-<root-reconciler-name>`, this is not guaranteed by Config Sync. You
can always find the service account by its labels; in particular, the labels
`configsync.gke.io/sync-kind` and `configsync.gke.io/sync-name` should be useful.

## Risks and Mitigations

This feature is entirely backwards-compatible, by means of being opt-in.

## Test Plan

Implementation of this feature can includes automated tests that verify the behavior.

## Open Issues/Questions

N/A

## Alternatives Considered

One could imagine exposing settings with slightly different semantics - e.g. a simple
boolean for turning the `ClusterRoleBinding` off, or a setting to change what service
account the reconciler is running with. However, these both put a bigger burden on the
user in order to utilize them even for the simple use cases, which is why changing which
role to bind to is probably the most user-friendly knob to expose. With the inclusion of

> a sentinel value to create no binding, the first of these alternatives is effectively

Reviewer: Please update this snippet to reflect that the sentinel value is no longer being used

Author: Done.

> a sentinel value to create no binding, the first of these alternatives is effectively
> supported, if through a slightly worse API. 

Author: ```suggestion
a switch to turn off creating the binding entirely, the first of these alternatives is effectively
supported as well, and the API supports extending for other use cases in the future. 
```
